# Dynamic-and-explainable-ML-model-for-TBI-mortality-prediction
Dynamic mortality risk prediction in the intensive care unit (ICU) is crucial for supporting clinicians' decision-making, specifically in traumatic brain in-jury (TBI) patients. We aim to develop and evaluate a dynamic deep learning (DL) framework that can provide hourly updates of 30-day mortality risk prediction for TBI patients following ICU admission. Using the de-mographics and time series physiological data, a recurrent neural network-based model was trained on data from 135 TBI patients who were admitted to the Gold Coast University Hospital (GCUH), Australia. Model’s perfor-mance was evaluated utilizing the area under the receiver operating charac-teristics (AUC), Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC), accuracy, and other metrics. Model calibration and decision curve analysis were performed to in-terpret the model’s output and determine its clinical usefulness. The Shapley additive explanation algorithm is utilized to clarify the contribution of fea-tures to the predictions. The proposed method showed predictive perfor-mance on the cross-validation dataset that improved over time: MCC 0.24 and AUC 0.713 for the prediction at 24 hours after admission, 0.451 and 0.756 at 72 hours, 0.519 and 0.803 at 120 hours, and 0.748 and 0.946 be-fore twelve hours to the outcome (either death or discharge), respectively. The model was further tested with a holdout test dataset with 34 TBI patients, achieving an average prediction accuracy of 0.851, AUC of 0.632, and MCC of 0.403, respectively, in the first 24-hour interval. The proposed model demonstrates proof of principle with explainable results in predicting mor-tality risk, encouraging further development and validation in a clinical set-ting.
